README.md, before:

[![Tool Builds](https://github.com/mitchcapper/WIN64LinuxBuild/actions/workflows/tool_builds.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mitchcapper/WIN64LinuxBuild/actions/workflows/tool_builds.yml) | [![GNULIB Patch Tests](https://github.com/mitchcapper/WIN64LinuxBuild/actions/workflows/gnulib_tests.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mitchcapper/WIN64LinuxBuild/actions/workflows/gnulib_tests.yml)

<!-- MarkdownTOC -->

- [What is it?](#what-is-it)
- [Warnings](#warnings)
- [Why](#why)
- [Requirements](#requirements)
  - [MSYS2](#msys2)
  - [Visual Studio 2022](#visual-studio-2022)
  - [ENV Vars](#env-vars)
  - [Shell Launch](#shell-launch)
- [Other Notes](#other-notes)
  - [Credits](#credits)
  - [Tips & Tricks](#tips--tricks)
  - [Why don't you add these patches upstream?](#why-dont-you-add-these-patches-upstream)
  - [Why does it take so long to build?](#why-does-it-take-so-long-to-build)
    - [Things we try to do to fix this](#things-we-try-to-do-to-fix-this)
  - [Why bash?](#why-bash)

<!-- /MarkdownTOC -->

# What is it?

It is a few primary components:

- This is a set of patches, mostly for [gnulib](repo_notes/gnulib_README.md), to increase compatibility with windows systems.
- A common bash script helper (helpers*.sh) and short template file for easily compiling gnulib and non-gnulib linux apps.  The focus is on moving as much duplicate code to the helper includes rather than in each build script.
- A bash script that uses the above helper lib to compile a variety of common *nix tools for details on changes for each: [tar](repo_notes/tar_README.md), [grep](repo_notes/grep_README.md), [gzip](repo_notes/gzip_README.md), [pcre2](repo_notes/pcre2_README.md), [zstd](repo_notes/zstd_README.md), [coreutils](repo_notes/coreutils_README.md), [findutils](repo_notes/findutils_README.md), [diffutils](repo_notes/diffutils_README.md), [which](repo_notes/which_README.md), [sed](repo_notes/sed_README.md), [openssl](repo_notes/openssl_README.md), [wget](repo_notes/wget_README.md), [highlight](repo_notes/highlight_README.md), [patch](repo_notes/patch_README.md), [make](repo_notes/make_README.md), [automake](repo_notes/automake_README.md), [symlinks](repo_notes/symlinks_README.md), [wget2](repo_notes/wget2_README.md), [pdcurses](repo_notes/pdcurses.md), [libhsts](repo_notes/hsts_README.md), [wolfCrypt](repo_notes/wolfcrypt_README.md).    Also, WIP: [bash](repo_notes/bash_README.md).
- A tool to generate a basic Visual Studio debug project to debug the target, if you can't run the binary in the debugger you can add `launchdebugger()` to the code run from the CLI and will get the normal JIT prompt.  Note due to how the debugger launch works it may better to do a bit earlier than needed (or in the main launch).  If the code you want to debug into is part of a library then you need to remove that code from the library (and add to your MSVC project) or build that library in MSVC.  The VS project comes with `debug.h` and `debug.c` that includes a basic console/file logger.
- Easy build flags to compile debug versions of all the libraries and the project itself with MSVC edit and continue support (without needing them all in a VS project)
- Minimal changes to each target to make it work, to reduce maintenance requirements as the code changes.  For some of these projects we throw additional gnulib modules at it that seem to fix the problems, there may be easier ways but this does result in minimal changes to the native code base.
- Github actions produces **Windows binaries** for download.  You can find these under the [![Tool Builds](https://github.com/mitchcapper/WIN64LinuxBuild/actions/workflows/tool_builds.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mitchcapper/WIN64LinuxBuild/actions/workflows/tool_builds.yml) workflows, click on a successful one and then the downloads can be found under Artifacts on that page.  Note: you must be signed into github to see the artifacts produced.

# Warnings

This code and the scripts were quickly written without much testing, and often involving poor quality hacks.  Things like disabling testing, help generation, direct manipulation of autogenerated files post generation rather than fixing the generators.  Often I use _WIN32 gating for changes, this might break cygwin platforms or using gcc/g++ in Windows. Again these code changes are low quality, if upstream projects want to consider including them may be able to clean up those code blocks.

# Why

Like many of us, I use multiple operating systems and have always used windows versions of *nix tools. Sadly these are not always perfect for my needs due to:

- They are exceptionally dated (aka https://gnuwin32.sourceforge.net/ )
- They use mingw requiring several additional dlls and have odd mingw behaviors
- They are missing compile / library options like PCRE or other useful features
- People go to great lengths to patch original sources to make them work for windows, but the depth of those patches requires frequent maintenance that can be hard to keep up

There is the linux subsystem for Windows now, which while great you don't always choose the machines you must work on, and it requires using a separate shell from your current.

By focusing on the core gnulib library we can have fewer changes to maintain and have more instant compatibility across projects.  We still use MSYS2 for the shell environment as it is light weight (no virtualization requirement) and has great compatibility with standard nix shell/systems.

# Requirements

A great way to figure out all the requirements is to look at the github actions environment setup.  If you run into build failures it may be because you have common apps in your bin PATH conflicting with native functionality.

## MSYS2

https://www.msys2.org/ MSYS2 is a linux sub-system for windows but unlike cygwin largely works not to simulate all things linux but to provide the infrastructure to do native windows compiling.  Note msys does use some cygwin packages for its env.  We don't need any packages installed from the UI just launch a shell once installed or unzipped and then run: `pacman -S make gperf rsync autoconf wget gettext-devel automake autogen texinfo git bison python autoconf-archive libtool flex`.  Note for actually compiling we use a special way to enter the shell to make sure things we need are available (See Shell Launch below).  Note if you have an existing msys instance and already have various developer tools installed it may screw builds up. Configure scripts look for certain things and either fallback or try alternates when not found.  If you have something like GCC or msys/cygwin developer headers for certain packages installed these may take preference and either prevent builds from working, or require additional dlls to work.  The best solution is just create a second msys2 install just for this extract the msys2 archive to an alternate path and use the proper launcher to enter that msys and all will be well.   Similarly it is possible that if you have certain tools in your default path for windows say gcc or some other app configure looks for you may find again strange behavior.  This can be harder to fix as you will need to edit your shell launch script to remove those paths from your path before starting.

## Visual Studio 2022

https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/community/ free and older versions might work, but only tested with 2022.  Install cmake support (either through the cmake installer or VS) we will use this over the msys version so we have VS project formats.

## ENV Vars

Almost all config is done through the default_config.ini and overriding those settings in the f_*_build.sh scripts.  These are not required but some minor edits may need to be made the environmental variables are:

- WLB_BASE_FOLDER - The base folder for compiles
- WLB_SCRIPT_FOLDER - The checkout folder for this repo, most of the time we can get this from the executing script but a few bat files use it to be able to work with absolute paths
- MSYS_PATH - Path to your msys install used by the shell launcher scripts not required can edit them if you have non-default path.

## Shell Launch

To launch an msys shell you can use the helper msys_shell.ps1 or msys_shell.bat helper scripts from this repo.  Note these are expected to be run from the "VS Developer Command Prompt" or "VS Developer Powershell", this makes all the MSVC compilers in our path and configured. The helpers do a few key things:

- Exclude the msys path assistance that turns windows paths (ie: c:\temp\etc) into nix equivalents.   This is because it often will break all backslash handling when we actually want a backslash.  Use forward slashes for paths (see tips and tricks below).
- Puts us in with the ucrt64/gcc default toolset, this is what we want we dont even have gcc/g++ installed but it prevents us accidentally linking with the wrong items.
- Enables the command line for apps to show up in windows tools, by default it doesn't
- Finally makes sure for symlinks it uses native windows symlinks

If you want to configure your term launcher to automatically put you into the msys term ready to go you can simulate what the Developer Term is doing and use a start command for the terminal like:
`&{Import-Module "C:/Program Files/Microsoft Visual Studio/2022/Enterprise/Common7/Tools/Microsoft.VisualStudio.DevShell.dll"; Enter-VsDevShell $VS_INSTANCE_ID -SkipAutomaticLocation -DevCmdArguments "-arch=x64 -host_arch=x64"; . "$env:WLB_SCRIPT_FOLDER/msys_shell.ps1"}`.  To figure out your VS_INSTANCE_ID use the powershell command `Get-CimInstance MSFT_VSInstance`  and take the `IdentifyingNumber` from the one you want.  You can use the included `vs_msys_shell_launch.ps1` that will try to do the above before launching the msys shell.

Note the shell launch tools assume msys in c:\msys64 if the ENV var MSYS_PATH is not specified.  If you have it elsewhere update them accordingly or set the env var. 

# Other Notes

## Credits

Most of the work here as not done by me and there are some great resources out there.  There are links in places to original code. There are many other great compile projects out there including:

- https://gnuwin32.sourceforge.net/ - one of the most well known, many packages with detailed patch adjustments to make them work with Windows. Sadly stopped in 2010.
- https://github.com/mbuilov - Great builds for some common tools like grep, awk, sed in native MSVC form using an interesting process of cygwin to generate the commands and then the normal windows env to do the compiling.
- The https://github.com/coreutils team modernizing things and supporting GitHub mirroring of some gnulib libraries.
- https://github.com/uutils/coreutils a rust port of coreutils that is cross platform, hopefully they will take out a large segment of the coreutils need eventually.

## Tips & Tricks

- For paths try to use a path form that is compatible with both native msys binaries and windows binaries.  This form is "c:/path/to/item"  using forward slashes means works for both platforms and while normal msys autocompleting for paths is /c/path/to/item (no colon and leading slash) all tools seem to understand the "c:/path/to/item" form, in addition this is a valid windows path format so no conversion is needed.
- Even for non gnulib based tools using the gnulib build-aux comple/ar-lib wrappers that convert native gcc/ar commands to the MSVC equivalents is often enough to make many libraries work.
- It is possible to use msys to generate build batch files for Windows.   The helper scripts have a "log_make" function that can be called before the actual make command and will log the make sequence to a file.

## Why don't you add these patches upstream?

Normally I do start with PR for changesets I think are likely to be integrated.  GNU has put considerable effort into a compatibility level for Windows ( https://www.gnu.org/software/gnulib/manual/html_node/Native-Windows-Support.html and more).  Still for most GNU projects Windows is a very low priority.  Cygwin and WSL2 both exist for Windows and require less work from a maintenance POV than a native Windows environment.   Accepting more Windows build support could create some expectation of maintenance, at a very minimum code has to be compilable when future changes happen making more work for others.   GNU primarily works through mailinglists, in general I have sent mail to these lists in case there is any interest in the projects.  Per above, this code is weakly tested and some hacks,  many GNU projects are broadly used, so much more testing would be needed.  A starting action would be to just run the native tests.  Nothing would be better for it making it into the official codebases.  As the code is ready now however I put it here.

## Why does it take so long to build?

Almost everything uses straight from the master branch sources rather than actual release archives.  For those tools that rely on gnulib that means there is nearly always a bootstrap process, and it can be very slow. This is largely due to msys fork performance and the cost of process startup on windows vs *nix systems.

### Things we try to do to fix this

- There is gnulib-tool.py development to produce a not so shell heavy implementation we try to use this by default but often its blocker of missing `--automake-subdir` means it may not work for a project.  When we can use it though its probably 1000x faster than the standard gnulib-tool.
- Build config caching  less helpful if you are only compiling one tool once, but if re-configuring (ie after changing the gnu modules) this can save a boatload of time, as the configure scripts on windows are also quite slow.

## Why bash?

While I greatly prefer to not write bash scripts for large projects anymore, for a set of tools to assist with linux builds it seemed like the best choice.  Easy user modification and the ability to complete steps at the shell as well.

## Other Tools Not Considered

Generally the tools on this list are not considered as there are official native windows builds available if that is the case they will be linked to

- [curl](https://github.com/curl/curl/releases)

- [wget2](https://gitlab.com/gnuwget/wget2/-/artifacts) - we actually do have a wget2 build above mostly for debug support

- [nano](https://github.com/okibcn/nano-for-windows/releases)

- [less](https://github.com/jftuga/less-Windows/releases)

- [ffmpeg](https://github.com/rdp/ffmpeg-windows-build-helpers)

- [ripgrep](https://github.com/mitchcapper/ripgrep/actions)

- [mediainfo](https://mediaarea.net/en/MediaInfo)

Commit message:

More details on debug, several additional script additions,  disclaimer about cmake etc complications to just supportl ogging.

README.md, after:

[![Tool Builds](https://github.com/mitchcapper/WIN64LinuxBuild/actions/workflows/tool_builds.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mitchcapper/WIN64LinuxBuild/actions/workflows/tool_builds.yml) | [![GNULIB Patch Tests](https://github.com/mitchcapper/WIN64LinuxBuild/actions/workflows/gnulib_tests.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mitchcapper/WIN64LinuxBuild/actions/workflows/gnulib_tests.yml)

<!-- MarkdownTOC -->

- [What is it?](#what-is-it)
- [Warnings](#warnings)
- [Why](#why)
- [Requirements](#requirements)
  - [MSYS2](#msys2)
  - [Visual Studio 2022](#visual-studio-2022)
  - [ENV Vars](#env-vars)
  - [Shell Launch](#shell-launch)
- [Other Notes](#other-notes)
  - [Credits](#credits)
  - [Tips & Tricks](#tips--tricks)
  - [Why don't you add these patches upstream?](#why-dont-you-add-these-patches-upstream)
  - [Why does it take so long to build?](#why-does-it-take-so-long-to-build)
    - [Things we try to do to fix this](#things-we-try-to-do-to-fix-this)
  - [Why bash?](#why-bash)

<!-- /MarkdownTOC -->

# What is it?

It is a few primary components:

- This is a set of patches, mostly for [gnulib](repo_notes/gnulib_README.md), to increase compatibility with windows systems.
- A common bash script helper (helpers*.sh) and short template file for easily compiling gnulib and non-gnulib linux apps.  The focus is on moving as much duplicate code to the helper includes rather than in each build script. This includes several debug/trace tools and make/cmake/nmake wrappers.
- A bash script that uses the above helper lib to compile a variety of common *nix tools for details on changes for each: [tar](repo_notes/tar_README.md), [grep](repo_notes/grep_README.md), [gzip](repo_notes/gzip_README.md), [pcre2](repo_notes/pcre2_README.md), [zstd](repo_notes/zstd_README.md), [coreutils](repo_notes/coreutils_README.md), [findutils](repo_notes/findutils_README.md), [diffutils](repo_notes/diffutils_README.md), [which](repo_notes/which_README.md), [sed](repo_notes/sed_README.md), [openssl](repo_notes/openssl_README.md), [wget](repo_notes/wget_README.md), [highlight](repo_notes/highlight_README.md), [patch](repo_notes/patch_README.md), [make](repo_notes/make_README.md), [automake](repo_notes/automake_README.md), [symlinks](repo_notes/symlinks_README.md), [wget2](repo_notes/wget2_README.md), [pdcurses](repo_notes/pdcurses.md), [libhsts](repo_notes/hsts_README.md), [wolfCrypt](repo_notes/wolfcrypt_README.md), [awk](repo_notes/awk_README.md), [gawk](repo_notes/gawk_README.md), [zlib](repo_notes/zlib_README.md).    Also, WIP: [bash](repo_notes/bash_README.md).
- A tool to generate a basic Visual Studio debug project to debug the target, if you can't run the binary in the debugger you can add `launchdebugger()` to the code run from the CLI and will get the normal JIT prompt.  Note due to how the debugger launch works it may better to do a bit earlier than needed (or in the main launch).  If the code you want to debug into is part of a library then you need to remove that code from the library (and add to your MSVC project) or build that library in MSVC.  The VS project comes with `debug.h` and `debug.c` that includes a basic console/file logger.
- Easy build flags to compile debug versions of all the libraries and the project itself with MSVC edit and continue support (without needing them all in a VS project)
- Minimal changes to each target to make it work, to reduce maintenance requirements as the code changes.  For some of these projects we throw additional gnulib modules at it that seem to fix the problems, there may be easier ways but this does result in minimal changes to the native code base.
- Build entire projects in Windows native debug mode for full VS debugging and symbols
- Logging of build process to create a batch file (.bat) to be able to build most projects without any subsystem at all
- Github actions produces **Windows binaries** for download.  You can find these under the [![Tool Builds](https://github.com/mitchcapper/WIN64LinuxBuild/actions/workflows/tool_builds.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mitchcapper/WIN64LinuxBuild/actions/workflows/tool_builds.yml) workflows, click on a successful one and then the downloads can be found under Artifacts on that page.  Note: you must be signed into github to see the artifacts produced.

# Warnings

This code and the scripts were quickly written without much testing, and often involving poor quality hacks.  Things like disabling testing, help generation, direct manipulation of autogenerated files post generation rather than fixing the generators.  Often I use _WIN32 gating for changes, this might break cygwin platforms or using gcc/g++ in Windows. Again these code changes are low quality, if upstream projects want to consider including them may be able to clean up those code blocks.

# Why

Like many of us, I use multiple operating systems and have always used windows versions of *nix tools. Sadly these are not always perfect for my needs due to:

- They are exceptionally dated (aka https://gnuwin32.sourceforge.net/ )
- They use mingw requiring several additional dlls and have odd mingw behaviors
- They are missing compile / library options like PCRE or other useful features
- People go to great lengths to patch original sources to make them work for windows, but the depth of those patches requires frequent maintenance that can be hard to keep up

There is the linux subsystem for Windows now, which while great you don't always choose the machines you must work on, and it requires using a separate shell from your current.

By focusing on the core gnulib library we can have fewer changes to maintain and have more instant compatibility across projects.  We still use MSYS2 for the shell environment as it is light weight (no virtualization requirement) and has great compatibility with standard nix shell/systems.

# Requirements

A great way to figure out all the requirements is to look at the github actions environment setup.  If you run into build failures it may be because you have common apps in your bin PATH conflicting with native functionality.

## MSYS2

https://www.msys2.org/ MSYS2 is a linux sub-system for windows but unlike cygwin largely works not to simulate all things linux but to provide the infrastructure to do native windows compiling.  Note msys does use some cygwin packages for its env.  We don't need any packages installed from the UI just launch a shell once installed or unzipped and then run: `pacman -S make gperf rsync autoconf wget gettext-devel automake autogen texinfo git bison python autoconf-archive libtool flex`.  Note for actually compiling we use a special way to enter the shell to make sure things we need are available (See Shell Launch below).  Note if you have an existing msys instance and already have various developer tools installed it may screw builds up. Configure scripts look for certain things and either fallback or try alternates when not found.  If you have something like GCC or msys/cygwin developer headers for certain packages installed these may take preference and either prevent builds from working, or require additional dlls to work.  The best solution is just create a second msys2 install just for this extract the msys2 archive to an alternate path and use the proper launcher to enter that msys and all will be well.   Similarly it is possible that if you have certain tools in your default path for windows say gcc or some other app configure looks for you may find again strange behavior.  This can be harder to fix as you will need to edit your shell launch script to remove those paths from your path before starting.

## Visual Studio 2022

https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/community/ free and older versions might work, but only tested with 2022.  Install cmake support (either through the cmake installer or VS) we will use this over the msys version so we have VS project formats.

## ENV Vars

Almost all config is done through the default_config.ini and overriding those settings in the f_*_build.sh scripts.  These are not required but some minor edits may need to be made the environmental variables are:

- WLB_BASE_FOLDER - The base folder for compiles
- WLB_SCRIPT_FOLDER - The checkout folder for this repo, most of the time we can get this from the executing script but a few bat files use it to be able to work with absolute paths
- MSYS_PATH - Path to your msys install used by the shell launcher scripts not required can edit them if you have non-default path.
- You can override any setting using ENV variables as well, for example to enable debug building rather than editing the build script you can do `export BLD_CONFIG_BUILD_DEBUG=1`

## Shell Launch

To launch an msys shell you can use the helper msys_shell.ps1 or msys_shell.bat helper scripts from this repo.  Note these are expected to be run from the "VS Developer Command Prompt" or "VS Developer Powershell", this makes all the MSVC compilers in our path and configured. The helpers do a few key things:

- Exclude the msys path assistance that turns windows paths (ie: c:\temp\etc) into nix equivalents.   This is because it often will break all backslash handling when we actually want a backslash.  Use forward slashes for paths (see tips and tricks below).
- Puts us in with the ucrt64/gcc default toolset, this is what we want we dont even have gcc/g++ installed but it prevents us accidentally linking with the wrong items.
- Enables the command line for apps to show up in windows tools, by default it doesn't
- Finally makes sure for symlinks it uses native windows symlinks

If you want to configure your term launcher to automatically put you into the msys term ready to go you can simulate what the Developer Term is doing and use a start command for the terminal like:
`&{Import-Module "C:/Program Files/Microsoft Visual Studio/2022/Enterprise/Common7/Tools/Microsoft.VisualStudio.DevShell.dll"; Enter-VsDevShell $VS_INSTANCE_ID -SkipAutomaticLocation -DevCmdArguments "-arch=x64 -host_arch=x64"; . "$env:WLB_SCRIPT_FOLDER/msys_shell.ps1"}`.  To figure out your VS_INSTANCE_ID use the powershell command `Get-CimInstance MSFT_VSInstance`  and take the `IdentifyingNumber` from the one you want.  You can use the included `vs_msys_shell_launch.ps1` that will try to do the above before launching the msys shell.

Note the shell launch tools assume msys in c:\msys64 if the ENV var MSYS_PATH is not specified.  If you have it elsewhere update them accordingly or set the env var. 

# Other Notes

## Credits

Most of the work here as not done by me and there are some great resources out there.  There are links in places to original code. There are many other great compile projects out there including:

- https://gnuwin32.sourceforge.net/ - one of the most well known, many packages with detailed patch adjustments to make them work with Windows. Sadly stopped in 2010.
- https://github.com/mbuilov - Great builds for some common tools like grep, awk, sed in native MSVC form using an interesting process of cygwin to generate the commands and then the normal windows env to do the compiling.
- The https://github.com/coreutils team modernizing things and supporting GitHub mirroring of some gnulib libraries.
- https://github.com/uutils/coreutils a rust port of coreutils that is cross platform, hopefully they will take out a large segment of the coreutils need eventually.

## Tips & Tricks

- For paths try to use a path form that is compatible with both native msys binaries and windows binaries.  This form is "c:/path/to/item"  using forward slashes means works for both platforms and while normal msys autocompleting for paths is /c/path/to/item (no colon and leading slash) all tools seem to understand the "c:/path/to/item" form, in addition this is a valid windows path format so no conversion is needed.
- Even for non gnulib based tools using the gnulib build-aux comple/ar-lib wrappers that convert native gcc/ar commands to the MSVC equivalents is often enough to make many libraries work.
- It is possible to use msys to generate build batch files for Windows.   The helper scripts have a "log_make" function that can be called before the actual make command and will log the make sequence to a file.
- Non-makefile based builds (cmake etc) are a bit overcomplicated using wrapper scripts (or for cmake entire other build processes) to be able to capture the build commands and generate build .bat files.  This is often not needed and is more prone to breaking.   To prevent this set the best cmake style var to "vs" and any `BLD_CONFIG_BUILD_WINDOWS_COMPILE_WRAPPERS` set to 1 are set to 0.
- To build debug builds set the env var `BLD_CONFIG_BUILD_DEBUG=1` 
- To generate batch files for building without msys run the build script with the arg "log_full".  Note you likely need some generated files (like config.h) so these would need to be added along with the normal sources.

## Why don't you add these patches upstream?

Normally I do start with PR for changesets I think are likely to be integrated.  GNU has put considerable effort into a compatibility level for Windows ( https://www.gnu.org/software/gnulib/manual/html_node/Native-Windows-Support.html and more).  Still for most GNU projects Windows is a very low priority.  Cygwin and WSL2 both exist for Windows and require less work from a maintenance POV than a native Windows environment.   Accepting more Windows build support could create some expectation of maintenance, at a very minimum code has to be compilable when future changes happen making more work for others.   GNU primarily works through mailinglists, in general I have sent mail to these lists in case there is any interest in the projects.  Per above, this code is weakly tested and some hacks,  many GNU projects are broadly used, so much more testing would be needed.  A starting action would be to just run the native tests.  Nothing would be better for it making it into the official codebases.  As the code is ready now however I put it here.

## Why does it take so long to build?

Almost everything uses straight from the master branch sources rather than actual release archives.  For those tools that rely on gnulib that means there is nearly always a bootstrap process, and it can be very slow. This is largely due to msys fork performance and the cost of process startup on windows vs *nix systems.

### Things we try to do to fix this

- There is gnulib-tool.py development to produce a not so shell heavy implementation we try to use this by default but often its blocker of missing `--automake-subdir` means it may not work for a project.  When we can use it though its probably 1000x faster than the standard gnulib-tool.
- Build config caching  less helpful if you are only compiling one tool once, but if re-configuring (ie after changing the gnu modules) this can save a boatload of time, as the configure scripts on windows are also quite slow.

## Why bash?

While I greatly prefer to not write bash scripts for large projects anymore, for a set of tools to assist with linux builds it seemed like the best choice.  Easy user modification and the ability to complete steps at the shell as well.

## Other Tools Not Considered

Generally the tools on this list are not considered as there are official native windows builds available if that is the case they will be linked to

- [curl](https://github.com/curl/curl/releases)

- [wget2](https://gitlab.com/gnuwget/wget2/-/artifacts) - we actually do have a wget2 build above mostly for debug support

- [nano](https://github.com/okibcn/nano-for-windows/releases)

- [less](https://github.com/jftuga/less-Windows/releases)

- [ffmpeg](https://github.com/rdp/ffmpeg-windows-build-helpers)

- [ripgrep](https://github.com/mitchcapper/ripgrep/actions)

- [mediainfo](https://mediaarea.net/en/MediaInfo)
